# Remember Amazon and Netflix’s Priorities When Deploying Automated Systems
As companies increasingly rely on automated systems to drive efficiency and innovation, three essential elements have emerged as crucial to success: scalability, reliability, and security.

Together, they form the backbone of effective automation, enabling organizations to adapt to changing demands, minimize downtime, and protect against evolving threats. Successfully leveraging these elements is [critical to maintaining customer trust and building](https://thenewstack.io/model-server-the-critical-building-block-of-mlops/) for the future.

**Successful Automation**
A system’s scalability is paramount for supporting a business’ future growth. Planning saves money and facilitates seamless upscaling — instead of scrambling to meet demand, automated scaling systems help keep enterprises moving efficiently and effectively. Successful companies plan for long-term success, building systems that can scale as the business grows.

Scalability is vital for safeguarding customer experiences during predictable and unpredictable traffic spikes. Consider online fantasy sports: traffic spikes significantly during games as players earn points and individuals log on to the website to check their scores. Automated systems can scale with demand, quickly increasing or decreasing capacity as needed. Retail is another industry where automated scaling is incredibly helpful. E-commerce giant Amazon uses automated scaling to handle the seasonal traffic load. Still, even small organizations can benefit since the system can scale as needed without the guidance of a human worker.

To some extent, a system’s reliability is related to its ability to scale as needed, as unexpected traffic spikes or growth beyond a system’s capacity can have severe, negative impacts on performance. Reliability is foundational for any company’s reputation. Customers expect continuity and functionality, and any decline can damage customer trust. Automated systems can ensure consistent performance and operational continuity.

Between 2024 and 2028, [Statista](https://www.statista.com/statistics/871513/worldwide-data-created/#statisticContainer) predicts that the amount of data “created, captured, copied, and consumed globally” will more than triple, and it is becoming more critical that organizations safeguard this data. [Data leaks and security](https://thenewstack.io/container-security-a-troubling-tale-but-hope-on-the-horizon/) breaches have profound and long-lasting effects on a company’s reputation. A 2024 [study](https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/626ff4d25aca2edf4325ff97/6616ac89caf4b6d08d22c3d6_State%20of%20AI%20in%20Cyber%20Security.pdf) by Darktrace found that data breaches were among the top three incidents most damaging to an organization’s reputation, above a scandal involving a CEO. Following Target’s security breach in 2013, the [CEO and CIO resigned](https://www.sipa.columbia.edu/sites/default/files/2022-11/Target%20Final.pdf)__.__ The company was estimated to lose $1 billion from the attack, and its share price fell by over 2%.

Automated systems are powerful tools for combatting attacks, decreasing response time, and reducing risk. In digital security, constant monitoring and fast response are critical for avoiding and addressing breaches. Unlike human workers, automated [security systems can monitor for attacks and vulnerabilities](https://thenewstack.io/root-out-vulnerabilities-in-github-as-you-merge-code-changes/) around the clock and respond instantly. When properly integrated with tools like artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML), automated security systems can recognize patterns humans might miss, reducing the risk of breaches.

**Business Optimization **
By supporting reliability, scalability, and security, automated systems help enterprises optimize their operations. Load balancing and predictive maintenance are critical for reliability; companies need their systems always to be available to customers. When people open their Netflix applications, they expect the system to function normally, regardless of how many other users there are. Automated systems allow companies like Netflix to load balance more effectively. Automated systems can detect performance drops due to user volume sooner and automatically [load balance to other servers](https://thenewstack.io/how-saas-based-global-server-load-balancing-eases-it-burden/). And if one server is often overloaded, automated systems preemptively identify the issue before it becomes a serious problem, allowing businesses to conduct predictive maintenance.

Microservice architectures are key features of automated systems that allow them to maintain reliability and ensure scalability. With a monolithic architecture, responding to issues within the system in real time is challenging, if not impossible. On the other hand, microservice architectures let organizations add, scale, shrink, or remove services as needed. Each specialized component can be developed, deployed, operated, and scaled individually, enabling businesses to automate the architecture more effectively than in a monolithic system.

With increasing customer [data available to companies](https://thenewstack.io/the-next-wave-of-big-data-companies-in-the-age-of-chatgpt/), security must be considered at every step in the design, development, and deployment processes; it cannot be an afterthought. One essential component is using secure coding. Secure coding practices, such as those outlined by the [Open Worldwide Application Security Project](https://owasp.org/www-project-developer-guide/draft/appendices/implementation_dos_donts/secure_coding/) (OWASP), help minimize the risk of introducing security vulnerabilities to software during development.

AI-driven security tools are becoming increasingly ubiquitous, in part because of how effective they can be. [In a 2024 survey](https://cdn.prod.website-files.com/626ff4d25aca2edf4325ff97/6616ac89caf4b6d08d22c3d6_State%20of%20AI%20in%20Cyber%20Security.pdf), 95% of cybersecurity professionals agreed that AI will improve their organization’s defenses. Respondents identified improved threat detection, identifying exploitable vulnerabilities, automating some security tasks, and faster threat response as the top four areas where the technology will have an impact. Because AI and ML algorithms are trained on and capable of quickly parsing large data sets, they help detect potential cyberthreats and identify unusual patterns or behavior. AI-enabled systems support human infosec teams by offering continuous, end-to-end monitoring and detection, quickly flagging issues and incidents for review and identification.

**Automation in Action**
For years, giants like Amazon and Netflix have leveraged automated systems to improve business operations and customer experience. Amazon has many business arms, including its original online e-commerce platform and the on-demand cloud computing platform [Amazon Web Service](https://aws.amazon.com/?utm_content=inline+mention) (AWS). In 2024, the e-commerce branch announced AI-generated shopping recommendations and the [AI chatbot Rufus](https://www.wired.com/story/amazon-ai-agents-shopping-guides-rufus/), which acts as a digital agent. Amazon utilizes various AWS solutions to handle the immense traffic each year during the company’s [Prime Day](https://aws.amazon.com/blogs/aws/how-aws-powered-prime-day-2024-for-record-breaking-sales/), including the automated threat detection service GuardDuty, ElastiCache to enhance performance, and container orchestration service AWS Elastic Container Service (ECS).

To handle customers’ viewing demands, Netflix employs a [prioritized ](https://netflixtechblog.com/enhancing-netflix-reliability-with-service-level-prioritized-load-shedding-e735e6ce8f7d)load-shedding strategy, prioritizing critical requests, such as a user pressing “play” on a title, over non-critical requests. There’s also [good evidence](https://www.lowpass.cc/p/netflix-ai-platform-genai-llm-hiring) that the company is exploring the use of AI for captioning and localization, enabling it to better communicate with customers worldwide. And, of course, the platform’s famous [recommendation algorithm](https://help.netflix.com/en/node/100639) uses data on users’ behavior on the service, similarity to other users, and individual preferences like genre, actors, what time a user is on the platform, preferred languages, and other variables to automatically generate suggested viewing lists.

It’s clear that AI and ML are already playing significant roles in how companies address scalability, reliability, and security issues, and the technology will continue to expand. AI is well suited to support automated systems when used responsibly and effectively, partly because ML models can use feedback loops to learn and improve the model autonomously. These tools will still require human oversight for the foreseeable future, especially in critical sectors such as security.

While automated, round-the-clock monitoring provides significant security benefits, organizations must increasingly [develop practical and proactive security](https://thenewstack.io/how-to-get-started-with-http3/) strategies to address the human risk factor. One such [strategy is adopting a zero-trust](https://thenewstack.io/ebooks/security/trust-no-one-and-automate-almost-everything-building-a-modern-zero-trust-strategy/) and least-privilege approach. Zero-trust mandates that access to data and resources is based on the principle of least privilege and made inaccessible by default. A least-privilege approach grants users access only to required resources for a limited time. These principles help reduce the risks posed by cybercriminals and errors made by fatigued or disinterested employees.

Automation is an increasingly critical tool for organizations. It facilitates faster responses to security threats, mitigates unpredictable traffic, and responds to bugs much more rapidly than human workers. Scalability, reliability, and security are the pillars of successful automation. Building modular systems improves scalability and ensures companies can adapt to growth. Investing in reliability enhances customer experience and minimizes downtime. Incorporating effective security strategies and measures at every business level protects data, ensures compliance, and builds customer trust.

[
YOUTUBE.COM/THENEWSTACK
Tech moves fast, don't miss an episode. Subscribe to our YouTube
channel to stream all our podcasts, interviews, demos, and more.
](https://youtube.com/thenewstack?sub_confirmation=1)