Linux is not a "one and done" silver bullet to solve all your computer issues. It is like any other operating system in that it will require users to learn its methods and quirks. Admittedly, it does require a little bit more technical knowledge to dive into the nitty-gritty of the OS and fully unlock its potential, but many distributions (such as Mint) are ready to go out of the box and may never require someone to open a command line. Our main media PC runs Mint and my younger children (aged 4 and 5 as of this writing) are able to navigate it without issue. My older kids are able to load games on it and play with Bluetooth controllers with no issue.

Personally, I like a bit of a challenge, and Linux balances usability with the carrot of a deeper computing experience. Depending on the distribution, I could have been up and running immediately after installation, but I wanted something more. The beauty of Linux is its flexibility; you can use a distribution that is as challenging or straightforward as you like.

Installing Linux not only saved three machines in my house (my laptop, desktop, and our media PC); it resurrected the joy of using a computer. It has been frustrating at times, but the rush of finally fixing a problem after a bit of work is unlike anything I felt on Windows. When I fix a problem on Windows, it's more of a shrug of the shoulder and relief that I'll no longer feel like I'm being stabbed in the eye.

I think that's because the issues I ran into on Linux were, for the most part, my fault. On Windows or macOS, most problems I run into are caused by a restriction or bug in the OS. Linux gives me the freedom to break my machine and fix it again, teaching me along the way.

With Microsoft's refusal (either from pride or ignorance) to improve (or at least not crapify) Windows 11 despite loud user outrage, switching to Linux is becoming a popular option. It's one you should consider doing, and if you've been thinking about it for any length of time, it's time to dive in.